Hey friends. I want to
thank our sponsor. Reagan, are
you struggling to replicate the
bugs and performance issues that
your customers are reporting? Plug
Reagan into your web and
mobile applications right now, and
diagnose problems in minutes rather
than hours. Kiss goodbye. Having
to dig through log files
and relying on frustrated users
to report issues, make your
software development life so much
easier. Using Reagan's error, crash,
and performance monitoring tools. Every
software team can create flawless
software experiences for their customers
with Reagan. Try it free
today@raygun.com. That's our a Y
G U n.com. Scott Hanselman.
This is another episode of
Hansel minutes today. I'm talking
with Eugene sender. LinkedIn is
the lead on scum VM,
and they are celebrating the
release of blade runner available
for purchase on digital copy
at Gog. This is a
point and click adventure game
developed by Westwood studios originally
in 1997. And now thanks
to the effort of gawg
and the great work of
the folks at scum available
for the first time. Again.
Thank you sir, for talking
with me today. Thank you,
Scott. And hello everyone. I
have been a, a big
fan of these kind of
classic graphical point and click
adventure games. They all have
a certain style. We've all
seen them before games like
maniac mansion and a day
of the tentacle. They all
look similar because they're all
kind of coming from the
same place. What is the
history of these games? Oh,
the history of these games
are coming from LucasArts. So
they had this small, initially
a small game department and
they had a number of
prominent and talented people and
collected there. And this is
where it comes from. And
by the way, the name
of scandium project is coming
from the subsystem, which they
created for implemented those case
games. So scum is the
abbreviated us script creation utility
for manic mansion. This is
the project comes from and
it's script creation, utility for
maniac mansion, virtual machine, and
in a world of things
like Mame, the multi arcade
machine emulator, it's significant. Don't
you think that it's not
called the script creation utility
emulator? Absolutely. Because we repeatedly
were telling that a scum
BM is not an emulator.
Actually we do have several
emulators primarily for the sound
cards like MP3 to, or
at least inside of it,
but it's going to be,
and it's still not why.
So, because originally LucasArts and
Sierra, They came up with
this clever idea of creating
a virtual machine, civil similar
to Java VM, let's say,
because it tastes some small
set of up codes. Then
it has languages, which would
be easier for artists and
non-developers to understand and write
the game script. And after
that, then in order to
import the game to a
certain new platform, and you
know, at that time we
had released this for many
platforms like Amiga Harry Mac
doors, all of them at
once, it was much low,
lower effort. So this is
where VM comes from. So
we are just yet another
implementation of that virtual machine.
That is how it started.
So When I was running
these games in the nineties,
myself on a machine, was
I running a virtual machine
of sorts or script runner
when I was running on
the original dos implementation that
came yeah. From the LucasArts
and year onlines, precisely, this
is what you were doing.
Just, you didn't know about
this And where have these
companies gone. They're all, they're
all left and right. Is,
is the, the, the is
the stuff underneath scum, like
Abandoned where, and now this
is an open source project
that has picked it up.
Or have you worked with
any of the original engine?
I would say neither in
this particular case. So first
of all, I need to
mention that abandon ware is
not a proper legal concept.
And this is very important
because yes, because many people
have misunderstand that they come
to us and say, Hey,
this game is 20 years
old. Can I download it
from somewhere? No, very good
point. You know that the
copyright law is called Mickey
mouse law because they extended
it. They lobbied currently it
extends to 85 years. So
those companies, some of them
are defunct. Some of them
not. So currently we sup
we have over 60 engines.
I, I didn't count last
time. So what is happening?
We have, let's say two
big buckets of four games
of game engines. One of
those, and this is particularly
talking about scum in this
particular case. This is when
we reverse engineer it from
the scratch we implemented and
we enhance it along the
way. So in many cases
it does, it has very
little resembles we original source
code. Why I'm telling you,
because later we were acquiring
illegally source code for some
of those engines, which were
already implemented. And second to
bucket is when in fact
original developers or current IP,
right holders approach us. They
give us the source codes,
usually under NDA. Sometimes not
sometimes it's like free for
all and they just ask
us, Hey, I put my
soul and time and sweet
in this game. It is
so sad to see it
dying dead. Now, not possible
to run. Could you guys
please like use it and
make it portable because Cambium
is all about portability. So
those are two parts. And
I would say about 30%
of our engines are based
on the original source Scott
and the two thirds are
actual reverse engineering from this
crash, which is long and
tedious process. Wow. Now why?
And forgive my ignorance for
the question, but if it
were an emulator of sorts,
like the difference between an
emulator and something like scum
VM is that an emulator
picks up those byte codes
and just kind of runs
them and emulates pretends to
be another system. But you
know, games based on the
scum VM engine ran on
a tare or NES or
Amiga they didn't, they weren't
all created on dos or
windows. Why are there engines?
Why are there multiple engine?
Why isn't there just one
Implementation of an engine? Okay.
So because, because it's exactly,
if it would be an
emulator and you have a
perfect emulator, you have those
box, for instance, which emulates
a typical PC, like a
bare bones, which allows to
run your dose and in
deployment, it's also emulate dose
int interruptions. And then you
have those box and then
you ran practically everything. I
dunno, from Edlin to Microsoft
office on the same thing
and it's one for all,
but then it comes with
a cost of, of really,
really high resource demand whilst
come VM is just re
implementation of the original engine
and what is happening then
if you're just consider that
those games are pretty old,
the mainly comes from eighties
from nineties. So the, some
of the ports of Cambium,
they have a 35 or
33 megahertz CPU. They have
like one Meg or two
megabytes, like an internal double
screen of Ram. They may
have a Jew, no desks
or anything, just a cartridge
like Nintendo 64. And then
you can imagine that the
resource requirements are very low
and portable as such, because
then you can run it
on the mobile devices without
fear of running your drawing,
draining your battery or something
like this. Oh, okay. And
this would allow you also
to make games available from
one engine available everywhere. So
games that were never released
for Dosser or windows can
now be moved over here.
Absolutely. Because a house can
be works internally. We have
a hardware abstraction layer it's
called old system. And then
once some developer familiar with
some specific platform comes and
they implement as we call
it backend for this platform,
then all of the engines,
which will be compatible with
physical capabilities of this machine
would just run. And similarly,
if an engine author comes
to us and writes an
engine on top of our
system, that would mean that
it will run on practically
all of the ports, which
we have, why I'm mentioning
that practically all of them,
because sometimes you might have
restrictions. Like you may have
a certain resolution hardware resolution
for the screen. You may
have certain games requiring keyboard
input, but you don't and
stuff like this in the,
in the past, On the
emulator side, a lot of
projects have had an uncomfortable
relationship with, with publishers, but
it's a significant, at least
from my perspective as a
user, that scum VM as
a Open source project seems
to have a very positive
relationship with publishers. Is that
been a conscious decision on
the part of the team
to partner with publishers, respect,
copyright, and then work on
formally releasing game? That's a,
that's a very good question
because it touches deeply the,
exactly the question of abandoned,
where from the very beginning,
we wanted to strictly for
the copyright law. And we
had the term in the,
in the, in the past,
we had several attempts from
LucasArts and also from other
parties to send a cease
and desist letter, et cetera.
But since we are not
violating the copyright law, because
always you would need to
have original game assets. It's
going to be a mess,
just the executive bill, a
drop in replacement. Then there
was no thing in like
unlawful, and this is why
it gives safety and give
safety to the project, first
of all. But then it
gives the safety and assurance
to the let's say IP
rights owners, which interests us
their intellectual property, like a
game assets or for studying
or original source code, because
we have a reputation of
not giving away anything of
not disclosing anything, which we
have NDA signed. And this
is why many companies actually
happy to collaborate with us.
And I can, for instance
mentioned, one of the biggest
recent releases is a missed
anniversary, correct collection 25th years.
This was created in close
collaboration between CRM and the
scum BM. Unfortunately we had,
they lost all the source
codes. We had the implementation
between DEET, a lot of
number one enhancement specifically for
this. And we, as a
result released ultimate multilanguage game
for the Raven and for
the mist and for the
missed masterpiece, which was not
existing, just because if we
were just working with the
IP rights owners and they
were safe with us, we
were cool with them. And
as you see, this is,
this is there, it's on
the market. It feels like
it would be really hard
to find the people who
own the intellectual property 20,
30 years later, is that
part of the partnership that
you have with folks like,
like Gog, that they help
hunt those people down and
then negotiate that. Cause I'm
assuming that's not the fun
part of the job. You
want to write some cool
code. Yes, it is pretty
challenging. And very often sometimes
we come approach. So what
we do, we do just
approach different people or from
the credits for different games.
And Hey, do you still
have it? Do you still
have, can you legally share
it with us blahblahblah.com or
what helps is that they
collaborate with IP rights owners
and very often those IP
rights owners that could be
third party, not original ones,
but then they can get
assets and it can give
a perfect example about this.
One of the latest games
on scum still not yet
supported fully is Mon base
commander. It is the multitest.
The engine was extremely enhanced
and it was in a
limbo for a long while.
But then I noticed on
gold.com that they started to
sell it. And I Haven
good relationship with them. I
approach them and say, Hey
folks, do you still have,
like, could you please contact,
introduce me towards the IP
rights owners, appearance owners were
super happy about this because
they were they're seeking for
increased compatibility. Currently a Mon
base commander is windows only.
They would like to private
on Mac for Linux, other
platforms. And as such, they
just under NDA shared with
the team. And particularly with
me, the game sets the
original source code. And we
find that we're able to
start working on the missing
pieces. So yes, it does
happen. The So Disney released
maniac mansion on steam and
Disney. I think of it
as being, as you said,
with the Mickey mouse, copyright
laws, the biggest and scariest
and most kind of aggressive,
you know, they, they, they,
they They're copyright very yes,
significantly. So exactly there is
no problem because you have
difference. So gamma says a
copyrighted game engine, you stand
alone. So they pre they
provide the full scum VM
source code. So they comply
with GPL. We are happy
and they are happy because
now Monica mentioned runs on
Linux coming from steam. That's
amazing. And just to be
clear for the audience who
is listening, maniac mansion ran
on dos. If I recall
exclusively in the early nineties,
actually not really because that
one is yes, those Amiga
Atari, but the whole day,
all the debt, any yes.
Even yes. At the time
now they're in Mack and
those are all loan debt.
You cannot run this on
any modern hardware. Of course
you can run it in
those box or in, let's
say Amiga and later, but
as I mentioned, you would
need to know the specifics
of a mega platform in
order to even launch it
from your chill floppy or
whatever. What you're doing while
with Cambium has just pointed
to the game and push
the button, run, start the
game. Okay. Fantastic. Hi, friends
as a programmer, you think
an objects with Mongo DB.
So does your database, Mongo
DB is the most popular
document-based database built for modern
application developers on the cloud
era, millions of developers use
Mongo DB to power. The
world's most innovative products and
services from cryptocurrency to online
gaming IOT and more, you
can try Mongo DB today
with Atlas, the global cloud
database service that runs on
AWS Azure and Google cloud
configure, deploy and connect to
your database in just a
few minutes, check it out
at Mongo db.com/atlas. That's M
O N G O db.com/atlas.
Yeah, I've had a physical
copy of blade runner since
I think 90, 97 or
98. And it's just been
a great, a great game.
And a couple of years
ago, I tried getting it
running under an emulator and
had all kinds of challenges
around a resolution and kind
of just gave it up,
trying to figure out how
to get a labor in
it, to work. And then
I heard that it was
now available again for purchase.
And it's been referred to
by you as the Holy
grail of a game's first
come VM. What is it?
That's so challenging. And so
mysterious about blade runner. Yeah.
Blade runner. Oh, we were
dreaming about support of it.
So, so many years I,
myself, it was on my
short list of the titles,
which I would love to
see. And it joined like
completed this list. The, as
the latest thin is it
laid there, honor, doesn't have
this VM and everything. And
the game is written in
plain C I think, or
C plus plus for everything.
So basically every location is
a separate DLL and there
are over 60 of those.
So I'm all out of
reverse engineering work is enormous.
At some point in time,
it was the biggest engine
and it's come VM recently
just overshadowed by the internet
in a interactive fiction. It's
a collection of engines running
under a single umbrella, but
it was bigger than scum
engine, which supports like 30
titles. It was bigger than
Sierra SEI, which supports like
other 50 titles. And it
is just for a single
game. It is over a
hundred thousand lines of code
in scum VM, all written
manually for out of this
assembly. It was tremendous amount
of work for people were
working in it. I was
also doing big chunk of
work for every actor because
every actor is a state
machine with a quite complex
logic. It, I think at
this moment, we know it's
not the thing is definitely
the biggest effort of the
team so far. This is
the biggest amount of time
which we spent so far.
It's very, very technical complex.
And the game itself internally
is not an easy, if
you heard about the capabilities
of the flexibility of the
game and that you have
like 16 endings, and then
there is like a diff
relationships between those non playable
characters and they game, they
developed for the game. So
this is why you have
a lot higher reliability. All
of this logic has to
be re implemented by us.
Wow. And people, I mean,
this game was incredibly ahead
of its time. I mean,
it was using voxels and
combining 3d and characters and
two D backgrounds. This is,
I know that there was
talk of how hard it
is to have 3d in
scum versus 2d. It gets
exponentially more difficult. The more
that's happening on the screen,
isn't it? Yes and no,
because my granddad particularly is
not a three to gain.
It uses a WorkSource, but
it is just basically how
to say pre renders out
of voxels over those sprites
for EITs for actors and
then just renders them. So
it is, you cannot like,
let's say turn the camera.
The camera is always fixed
point because as you mentioned,
the ground background is just
two D three dimensional and
it has no polygon. So
there is no, you cannot
accelerate it with open GL
RTA FGX or whatever. It's
all software rendering. So actual
part, which deals at least
with three points is maybe
like 500 lines of code.
The rest of a hundred
thousand is, has nothing to
do with three D What
was the hardest part of
it? And how did you
split the responsibility up? Because
the team is, you know,
you're not all sitting in
the same place, right? You're
geographically distributed. We are using
Trello, Trello board. And do
you, is it, is it
something that, you know, you
said it's big and it's
a lot of code and
it's tangled. Do you split
up responsibility by subsystem? Like,
okay, you handle resolution and
you handle audio. How do
you split up Your responsibility?
Yes, it was. That was
when they, so the engine
started to work on, it
started about eight years ago.
We started, we implemented character
like rendering for scene and
that, and then it was
dead. It was then staying
in limbo for maybe like
four, I would say four
years or so. And then
Peter Peter cohort came out
of blue with maybe like
20,000 lines of code already,
additional reverse engineers. He joined
the team and he sparkled
this interest in us. So
made moves another, a guy
who originally started the engine.
He was excited and Peter
continued with Kia, these internal
complex database for clues. Then
I was working on actors,
logic and  was working
on the logic for every
location. So this is how
we were doing. And then
whatever issues or whatever new
subsystem we were finding, we
were just dropping, creating a
new card on Trello. And
then whoever completes their task,
this is what, how we
were doing. I would say
that my part of it
was episodical. However, it led
to maybe like 20,000 lines
of code written because of
just the number of those
actors logic, but then the
folks, the other folks were
making it to the production
quality. Wow. Now I understand
that this has been, what,
eight years, nine years or
longer in the, in the
making the reverse engineering, is
that full time work or
is it something that happens
where you do a whole
lot of work and then
you wait for a lawyer
for, It was a, it
started eight years ago, but
the bulk of work, and
I would say that eight
years ago, till five years
ago from now 5% of
it were written. And then
it was much, much faster
of a current pinup and
the completed bulk of the
work where most of the
workforce finished in 2018 and
17. And definitely it is
not a full term work
because all of us work
for the companies, we are
all volunteers, but I was
spending every evening on doing
like all of those actors,
because there are, I don't
remember like 60 or so
like huge amount. And for
some logic is pretty simple.
Maybe a simple is like
500 lines of code, but
some of them like thousands
lines of code. So it
took time. Well, the idea
that these projects, we think
we, the community that, that,
that just get to go
now and go to, to
Gog, buy a game for
$10 and enjoy it. And
I think the important part
is to simply enjoy it
because it just works. We
sometimes forget the cast of
thousands and the years and
years of work behind it,
especially when it's open source
work and everyone has a
day job. It's definitely a
passion project. Exactly. Because a
squat important thing, we are
not paid for this. We
were not paid by Gog
or anyone else. So this
is why, for instance, when
people come to us angrily
and they say, hi, why
are you so dumb that
you implemented this feature? Sometimes
it's a bit frustrating and
discouraging to hear. Maybe we
do it out of love.
And the, the, the very
fact that you like random
John DOE is able to
play. It is just a
counter product of all of
us, of our love. Not
that you're entitled to do
it. We don't benefit from
golf selling these game. Unless
of course we have only
just affiliation program with them,
but not on bulk. Hmm.
That's a really important point.
And it is also important
for you to know, and
for, I hope the other
members of the team to
know how much it truly
is appreciated for, for me
to be able to sit
down with my now 10
year old and 12 year
old and play maniac mansion
or blade runner and share
with them something that was
important to me when I
was a kid and have
it just work is truly,
truly extraordinary. And then when
they're older to even be
able to go and look
at the source code, if
they decide to become programmers
and discuss the technology behind
it with them adds another
exciting layer to that relationship
that we have with these
games. Oh, I is like
your experience. Scott is really
related to me because one
of my biggest motivation to
work as Cambium was because
I found how marvelous humongous
entertainment, entertainment games are. And
I was making sure that
I'm raising my daughters on
Freddie fish, but part pajama,
Sam. And this is where
we put a lot of
effort into it. Yes. Yeah.
It's really special, isn't it?
Yes, absolutely. So the, the,
the most amazing thing in
the least the most recent
thing that you all have
done is blade runner. But
I also understand that sometimes
you'll just find some obscure
game and someone will get
excited about it and you'll
get support for it. Just
because how do you balance
your time between the eight,
the eight, a year long
experience or something like blade
runner, and then just finding
a game that maybe only
a few dozen people will
play and then making support
for that. So we are
making support for random games
only, and only if the
person comes or somebody comes
to us with the full
source code, then the rest
were done just because somebody,
some scum BM developer has
passionate about this game and
they have personal interest and
they would like to do
it like how the project
started. The project started because
two person independently, one wanted
to play monkey Island, two
only an X and another
one on month monkey Island
one and the first one
after implemented monkey Island to
want to make an it
playable. And then just a
couple of more games from
scummy engine just left. And
we had a number of
people like this, come into
us, working couple for a
couple of years on an
engine and then leave in
the project. This is how
it works. So when somebody
comes to us and say,
Hey, I would like to
you, like, I have this
childhood memory, could you please
implement it? You know, it's
difficult to justify working like
half a year, at least
half a year of your
free time in the evenings
on something you don't find
interest in, you are not
attached to. If there is
a source code, the work
makes becomes much, much easier.
Now on the source court,
when we had this, like
the typical time when you
have something playable is like
month or two much faster.
So this is why it
is like cool, because then
our library of supported game
six to expanded. But other
than that, no, like this
is the fat chance that
somebody would just work on
it just because they've been
asked, There's some pretty cool
stories of like, for example,
Terry Pratchett and perfect entertainment
found the source code for
Discworld and disc world too,
and made that available to
you Became available. And then
also, you know, Games that
might not necessarily be interesting
globally. It might be interesting
locally, like is a Polish
game. The, it was created
in 1995 and the teams
Like, you know, we want
to make sure that this
lives beyond us and it
doesn't get lost. So if
someone wants to play this
game, they can. That's pretty
amazing. Exactly. One of the
great examples of this is
the author of dream wave,
a doom web. There is
this game, dream web top
down adventure, and they author,
it came to us and
he told, Hey, recently copyright
was returned to me. Here
is the source code. Go
ahead, do it. And by
the way, here's the game
of sets. Make it three,
where do it. We were
so happy about this. Wow.
This how, what happened? He
wanted to exactly. He wanted
his game, his creation to
leave beyond all of those
old agent platforms That is
significant really, really significant dream
web is a 1994 cyberpunk
game. And the idea that
something is being rereleased as
freeware when their copyright is
returned, that really speaks to
that original thing that we
talked about at the beginning
of the discussion about abandoned,
where is not a thing,
right. It does it maybe
forgotten, but it's never abandoned.
Know there's always some legal
thing going on there, correct?
Yeah. So how can we
help scum VM? You say
that you're not in it
for the money, there's a
large team working on it.
Do you want us the
audience to just Bye and
support The games that are
really released on scum VM?
Or how can we let
you know that we appreciate
all the things that we're
doing that you're doing? There
are a couple of ways
of doing it. And let
me just mention it the
oldest in order of our
preference, but not necessarily of
order of being easy for
the audience, what we would
appreciate the most, if it
developers for instance, at this
moment, and this is really,
really painful for us, that
these games are pointed in
clique. And as you imagine,
and by the way, Krung
Gilbert himself was mentioned when
we had a port on
iOS that finally he has
monkey Island, as it meant
to be, to be played
with, with your fingertips, not
with a mouse, but we
don't have an iOS Porter
for several years now, same
with Android. We don't have
like young generation who has
experienced with this platform. They
think in about, Oh, instead
of working off some open
source project, let me let
for myself, do some coding
and put my, I dunno
game, which, Hey, make it
or on, on store and
get some bucks. Why should
I spend time on some
guys for free? And this
is a problem because on
Android, we have over a
half million installs, but we
have troubles with anything beyond
Android seven, which is now
how, what five years old.
So any developers here in
this and would like to
join the open source project
with like over $15 million loads,
there are certain benefits that
would be our most preference.
A second one, if, you
know, for instance, somebody who
possesses the source code four
or pieces of source code
for some game, you love,
you care for them, let
them contact to us. Maybe
we can work on this
game. So this would be
the second preference, third one,
a non-developers. But those who
would like to help the
project, for instance, keeping our
menu and documentation up to
date. So you just need
to know or translate it
into another language other than
English, like in German, Russian,
Chinese, whatever, because now we
have capabilities for, for translation.
This is also the last
one. Not that we need
it, but there is always
PayPal button. Or when you
buy in a games for,
from Google, from gog.com, if
you use our affiliation link,
the price for you stays
the same. We would have
just small commission out of
it also could help us
to pay hosting, but this
is the least preference. Very
cool. I'm going to make
sure to include in the
show notes, links to all
of the things that you've
talked about as well as
a link to by blade
runner on Gog using your
affiliate link. So we hopefully
we'll hear from some folks
who are listening to the
show and appreciate all the
hard work that you and
the team put into this
thing. It has really been
a joy to chat with
you today, and it's been
a real joy to play
blade runner again, and other
games that are now supported
over 250 games in the
library of adventures that you
can play with scum VM.
Thank you so much for
chatting with me. Yeah. Thank
you, Scott. It was a
pleasure. We've been talking with
your gene, Sandra Lanco from
scum VM project. You can
check them out@scummvm.org. There will
be links again in the
show notes. This has been
another episode of Hanselminutes and
we'll see you again next
week. .